The scholar-practitioner-divide is a theory
that many people talk about as if it's real,
and as if it always has been real.
To give a rare example of a situation in which
the division, y'know, was kind of open and
evident to everyone involved, I got a story
from a man who today is a university professor
of Buddhism about the first time he met the
senior professor (now deceased) A.K.
Warder.
Of course, when I knew A.K.
Warder, I always called him Tony.
A.K.
Warder was at that time a famous and important
scholar of Buddhism, and this much younger
student walks up behind him to say hello for
the first time, the first time ever meeting
him.
And the first words out of his mouth, Tony
Warder turns around and says, "Oh, so who
is this then?
You're not another one of those meditators
are you?"
And, uh, he said some more words to the effect
that he didn't want to have any students (studying
Buddhist philosophy) who, uh, engaged in meditation.
He was sick of it already.
So, at that moment, for the younger student,
who, indeed, was the kind of guy who was interested
in meditation, of one kind or another (like
most young people who are getting involved
in academic Buddhism have some level of sympathy
for the religion as it exists today), you
have a situation of kind of open hostility,
between someone who presents himself as a
scholar and only a scholar, diametrically
opposed to any kind of tradition or religious
practice.
And, uh, y'know, I've got to give Tony Warder
some credit: he was not a fraud.
He was a lot of things, he was despised by
almost everybody... [censored]
...Canadian newspapers are painfully vague.
Real Talk.
Almost everyone who has told me stories about
the guy (apart from my own interaction with
him) have always been very negative and very
sad.
But, he knew the texts, he knew the history,
he knew the language, and what he contributed
to Buddhism is much more valuable than what
he took away from it and, y'know, you've got
to respect the honesty of that guy standing
up in his pulpit and basically saying, "Look,
I'm a scholar of Buddhism, but I don't believe
in meditation, and I don't believe in reincarnation,
and I don't believe in magic", that he was
willing to say openly, that what he brought
to the study of Buddhism was a skeptical,
down-to-earth, outsider's view.
That's very rare, to have this kind of open
and clear break between, uh, those who practice
what they preach, and those and those who
openly preach that they don't practice.
Almost never happens.
The kind of consensus view that there's a
big confrontation between scholars on the
one hand and practitioners on the other always
seems to quote or derive from the work of
Charles Prebish, who is now retired but still
alive.
Almost nobody quoting or alluding to the work
of Charles Prebish, almost nobody has actually
read his work.
They tend to quote a summary of something
that somebody said at a conference that indirectly
derives from his work, and that's a shame.
Charles Prebish, what he contributed to this,
mostly was just very down-to-earth observations
about Buddhism as it exists today, in his
experience.
It's not hard to understand, it's not that
much different from a news-reporter just showing
up at the scene, talking to people, observing
what's going on (and, y'know, I don't mean
that as an insult, or to diminish what he
did).
He is, also, one of the most influential people
in the 20th century study of Buddhism, but,
y'know, his role, like a news reporter, is
very much of an outsider looking in, and,
normally, an outsider arriving with not that
much time to unearth whatever the story was,
and then move on to the next Buddhist temple,
which he did a lot of.
But this influential idea that's somehow wrapped
up in the intellectual legacy of Charles Prebish,
um, people have definitely come to perceive
it as much more real than it is.
I think the conflict that exists really comes
out of the deep uncertainty that most Buddhists
have (and that most Buddhist scholars have)
about what is in "the Bible" of Buddhism --and
I'm just leaving open [the question of], "What
is 'the Bible'?".
It's different for different traditions, it's
different for different languages, and so
on, but every tradition has some set of texts
that are a sort of definitive, canonical Bible
for the religion, and almost nobody has access
to those texts --neither the monks, nor the
people who call themselves scholars.
There are very rare individuals, like Tony
Warder (who gets to be an asshole to everyone
else, because when he shows up at the conference,
he's the only guy who can read the texts)
and those figures are too few and too far
between, and that's why it's such a loss when
even one of them turns out to have a bad attitude,
even if that's the only problem.
Obviously, with Tony Warder, that's not the
only problem, and his career was what it was.
And it did have devastating effects on some
people.
I've met people who felt that their own lives
were really destroyed by that guy, but that's
another story.
The hostility is not --in my opinion-- it's
not between scholars and practitioners, but
there's a very deep hostility between scholars
who are making their way on the basis of fraud
and those who are not, and between practitioners
who are getting by with fraud and those who
are not.
When you do meet a practitioner who's not
a fraud, they live in a state of uncertainty
about where their next meal is coming from,
and they live in real fear of being kicked
out of any institution they're in, and so
on, precisely because they refuse to go along
with the scams that very directly bring money
into institutional Buddhism.
And, y'know, the situation is fundamentally
the same within academia, it's just much nastier,
it involves a smaller number of people, and
it involves more money, in the hands of fewer
people.
Our tradition in Europe of what academia is,
is [itself] in no way secular.
It's very deeply bound up with church and
religious traditions, that's true even in
the U.S.A., which, obviously, has a relatively
short history of academic institutions.
In the 19th century, and into the early 20th
century, in the 19th century in Germany, the
tradition was for a professor to walk down
the aisle, and all the students would stand
in silence, as the professor walked up the
aisle in the middle, and the professor would
then ascend to a pulpit (not a lectern, a
pulpit) and the professor would tell the students
to be seated, and they would all sit in silence,
and then the professor would lecture.
I have read vivid descriptions of this from
American and other scholars who found it shocking
(in the 19th and 20th century) to see this
kind of religious, monastic, oppressive, atmosphere
hanging over what they thought of in more
Socratic terms, as being a theater of ideas,
open to debate and so on.
I remember a friend of mine told me about
his own feeling of shock when he went to France.
He was involved in departments of Political
Science, where he was expecting some level
of political debate and dissent within the
classroom.
What he found the tradition was, this is in
Sciences Po, in France, was of a totally hierarchical,
top-down arrangement of the classroom, where
one professor would sit at a table that was
on a stage at the front of the room, everyone
would be completely silent, the professor
would speak without interruption and have
no questions, in a totally authoritarian way,
[to the] end.
And his own graduate students, right through
to the end of their own PhDs, would never
once be involved in any debate, or any discussion,
or in any way challenge the professor, until
one day, they were the person sitting at that
desk, on the stage, speaking without interruption.
And, uh, [my friend] actually talked about
it with some of the professors and graduate
students.
Y'know, he asked the question, "Is it really
possible for the study of politics to exist
with this kind of hierarchical and heavy institutional
context put around it?"
So, in terms of the supposed division between
scholars and practitioners, y'know, both sides
are generally people who are either sincerely
aspiring to be scholars, or they're at least
trying to pass themselves off as scholars.
Whether they wear a suit and tie, or wear
a Buddhist monk's robes, it's one or the other.
And both sides are involved in practice, of
many kinds; again, Charles Prebish has written
about that at length.
Y'know, frankly, all the academics who present
themselves as secular, if they have made the
decision to devote their lives to the study
of Buddhism, they do have a connection to
the religion.
What that connection is, in each case, is
very different; certainly, it's hard to generalize,
because the type of people who become professors
of Buddhist studies are, as a rule, eccentric.
It's very hard to find two of them who have
anything in common, even when they get married.
There are married couples who are in Buddhist
studies, and you can very easily see the difference
between the husband and the wife's views on
Buddhism.
When I say fraud, what do I mean by fraud?
When I was [censored], I met a [censored]
professor, [censored] today, he's an assistant
professor at [censored], and he gave me a
tour of what was then his employer's institution,
[censored], and when he showed me around,
um, I think he had given this tour several
times before.
He met me, and with great relish and showmanship
and fanfare, he walked through the library
and picked out some books from the shelves,
pointed to the spine of the book, and made
comments on different collections of books
within their library.
And every single thing he said to me was factually
wrong.
At the time, it's stunning, because, on the
one hand, it's obvious to me, that he's so
used to giving this tour, and that the people
receiving this tour (even if they are PhD
students, or other professors, or even if
they are Buddhist monks) --the people on the
tour have absolutely no ability to be skeptical
of the claims he's making as he walks through
the library.
Doubtless, 99% of the people uncritically
regard him as a great scholar, because he
can walk through and offer this kind of passing
commentary on different impressive-looking
tomes that are on the shelf of the library.
But, boy, not today.
He was giving a tour to somebody who knew
the texts he was alluding to, and who knew
the languages involved.
In some cases these were quite obscure publications,
but, at that time, I knew what was out, I
knew what existed, and I knew what was on
those shelves.
And the types of errors he was making were
so crude, they were so incompetent, that it
would be like [meeting] someone who is supposed
to be a specialist in ancient Hebrew (in Biblical
studies) and they're pointing to the phone-book
from Baghdad, and saying, "This is one of
the most important new publications in Hebrew
studies", [this was] the nature of the language
errors (and so on) that he was making.
And, at the time, at first, I was stunned,
because I realized I was talking to someone
who was a fraud to a much greater extent than
I had guessed from earlier e-mail correspondence
with him (even in e-mail, he was making statements
that showed me he did not know what he was
talking about).
But he was very self-confident, and he had
great flair.
And, y'know, I responded...
I didn't say, "What, are you crazy?", I responded
by trying to get him to slow down, and just
talk to me about the information that was
on the spine of the book.
In one case I said to him, "Look, I'm sorry,
but I know the book you're talking about,
and I have even met with the senior editor
who arranged the publication of this book,
who oversaw the collection of these texts,
and the editing of it".
I [had] talked to the editor through a translator,
and so on.
[So] in some cases, I really had direct knowledge
of how these books were put together.
"And what you've said about it is not true
at all.
Can't we talk for a moment...", because also,
I want to share this information with somebody
who, you hope, is going to be an appreciative
audience or a critical audience, who is going
to take it on board and make use of it.
A very small number of people who speak English
will ever take an interest in these books.
And he kept up the act.
He refused to slow down, or be skeptical,
or reflect on, the things he was... the line
he was selling me, as we went around, through
that library, and gave me this prepared tour.
That conflict is very real, and very deep.
And the difference between [censored] and
the other professors I've interacted with
is that he is so blithe, and he is on such
an immense ego-trip, that he is what we would
call "unflappable" in English.
He refuses to even slow down enough to feel
ashamed of the nonsense he is selling.
And, of course, many of the other professors
I have spoken to are more reflective, are
more meditative, to be honest.
And, uh, many times, even when I was still
an undergraduate, and I would just ask simple,
factual questions, [such as,] "I'm sorry,
don't you mean the 4th century A.D., not the
4th century B.C.?", sometimes just very simple
questions, with absolutely no ill intentions,
and I saw professors have emotional breakdowns,
and, uh... y'know, fly off the handle, get
out of control in various ways, just when
talking about the simplest, factual element,
of what people in this discipline should know.
That's a real conflict: sincere interest,
vs. fraud.
But I've got to tell you, I've spent a lot
of time inside Buddhist institutions, talking
to Buddhist monks; when I talk to Buddhist
monks who are sincere about anything, there's
no such conflict.
Some Buddhist monks are sincere about humanitarian
work, and they'll tell you openly, "I don't
know ancient philosophy, but I know we've
got people in this suburb of Phnom Penh, Cambodia,
who are dying of A.I.D.S., and they have kids,
and the kids are going to be orphans in 5
years, and this is what I'm doing about it".
I've gotten along with those guys fine.
That's a real example, sadly.
I've gotten along with monks who are very
sincere about the social and political dimensions,
while being open about their own ignorance
of the ancient texts.
They say, "Well..."...
I remember, I've spoken to several monks who
said openly that what they know about Buddhist
philosophy relied on English, even though
their first language was Chinese, or Cambodian,
or Thai, or what-have-you (or Sinhalese, also
with Sri Lankan monks).
They've said openly that what they know about
ancient Buddhism relies on these Western,
European interpretations and discussions.
And, y'know, many times they were aware that
this had shortcomings, but they were also
aware that other monks who couldn't even read
in English were burdened with a very different
challenge in struggling to make connections
between modern problems and ancient philosophy.
So, [now I have] the challenge of trying to
put an upbeat ending on such a depressing
little video lecture.
What is personal integrity?
At a minimum, personal integrity involves
the honesty, the strength and the detachment
to say, "I don't know", when the truth is
that there's a book up on a shelf, and I don't
really know what's inside the covers.
You may not even know what's really written
on the spine.
And there is a conflict, that will perhaps
never end, between people who are involved
in the academic study of Buddhism (or the
openly religious practice of Buddhism), there's
a conflict between people who have integrity,
who will not be bought and sold, and people
who have no integrity.
And, um, y'know, looking back, I know why
everyone hates Tony Warder, I even know why
people hate Richard Gombrich; I really like
Richard Gombrich's character, I really do
like him; but those guys... [sigh].
Well, I guess it will wait for another video.
But, um, we're all left with the question
of how we're going to live with integrity.